Adding jib tutorial. (#2623)
chainguard-dev/edu: content/chainguard/chainguard-images/tooling/building-java-containers-with-jib.md

---
title: "Build Java Containers with Jib"
linktitle: "Jib"
type: "article"
description: "In this tutorial, you'll learn how to build minimal Java containers using Jib and Chainguard base images"
date: 2025-09-23:49:31+00:00
lastmod: 2025-09-23:49:31+00:00
draft: false
tags: ["Chainguard Containers"]
images: []
menu:
  docs:
    parent: "chainguard-images"
weight: 001
toc: true
---

[Google's Jib](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/jib) is a container
image build tool designed specifically for Java applications. Unlike other
approaches, Jib does not depend on Docker or require users to write

> Dockerfiles. Instead, Jib integrates directly with the Maven and Gradle build

Author: Agree about moving some stuff up, but I think the point about direct integration is important to say at the start.

systems to create container images for Java applications. When paired with
[Chainguard Java
Containers](https://images.chainguard.dev/directory/image/jre/versions), Jib
provides a streamlined path to building secure, minimal container images for
Java applications.

This tutorial will walk you through building a demo application with Maven,
Jib, and Chainguard Containers.  

## Prerequisites

Before proceeding, you'll need to meet the following requirements:

 - A Linux or macOS system with terminal access

>  - Java Development Kit (JDK) 21 or later installed

Author: Could do. I feel most people use a package manager to install java.

>  - Java Development Kit (JDK) 21 or later installed

Author: I've added this.

    <maven.build.timestamp.format>yyyyMMddHHmmss</maven.build.timestamp.format>
  </properties>
  <dependencies>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
      <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-web</artifactId>
      <version>3.5.5</version>
    </dependency>
  </dependencies>
  <build>
    <plugins>
      <plugin>
        <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
        <artifactId>spring-boot-maven-plugin</artifactId>
        <version>3.5.5</version>
        <executions>
          <execution>
            <goals>
              <goal>repackage</goal>
            </goals>
          </execution>
        </executions>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
</project>
EOF
```

To run the build, run the following command:

```
mvn clean install 
```

Observe the  output indicating that the build was successful:

```
...
[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
[INFO] BUILD SUCCESS
[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
[INFO] Total time:  6.741 s
[INFO] Finished at: 2025-08-19T16:54:25+02:00
[INFO] -
```

Now you can run the application with the following command:

```

> java -jar target/jib-demo-1.0.0.jar

Author: I don't really understand what happened here. It looks like you compiled with 25 but ran with a older version of Java? I ran through it again and it worked.

> java -jar target/jib-demo-1.0.0.jar

Author: I'm not sure what to say. It should be working, let me know if you still hit problems and I'll see if I can figure it out.

```

The application exposes a web server on port `8080`. You can test the application
with a `curl` request from another terminal window: 

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

With Jib configured, you can now build your containerized Java application.
Because we have specified `dockerBuild` as the execution goal, this step will
require a local Docker install. If you want to avoid using Docker and push the
image straight to a registry, jump to Stage 5.

Run:

```shell
mvn clean install
```

You’ll get output like the following:

```
...
[WARNING] Detected multi-platform configuration, only building image that matches the local Docker Engine's os and architecture (linux/arm64) or the first platform specified
[INFO]
[INFO]
[INFO] Container entrypoint set to [java, -cp, @/app/jib-classpath-file, com.example.demo.DemoApplication]
[INFO] Container entrypoint set to [java, -cp, @/app/jib-classpath-file, com.example.demo.DemoApplication]
[INFO]
[INFO] Built image to Docker daemon as linky
...
```

This command has compiled the application, built the container, and loaded it
into the local Docker instance.

To verify that the image was built:

```shell
docker images linky
```

Which will provide details on the new image:

```
REPOSITORY   TAG       IMAGE ID       CREATED         SIZE
linky        latest    43171844f68e   3 minutes ago   465MB
```

> You should also scan the image for CVEs. This example uses

Reviewer: I feel like this step should be after building the image, it seems a little premature / odd here?

Author: I updated the versions in the pom.xml and there's no vulns now.

## Stage 4 — Testing the Containerized Application

After building your container image, test it to ensure it works correctly.
Start by running the container locally:

```shell
docker run -p 8080:8080 linky
```

The application will start, and you'll see Spring Boot's startup logs. In a
separate terminal, test the endpoints:

```shell
curl http://localhost:8080/
```

This should return:

```
Hello from Jib and Chainguard!
```

Test the health endpoint:

```shell
curl http://localhost:8080/health
```

Expected output:

```
Application is healthy
```

Stop the container by pressing `Ctrl+C` in the terminal where it's running.

## Stage 5 — Building and pushing to a remote registry

One of the strongest points of jib is that you don't need Docker installed to
build and distribute container images. In this step we will change `pom.xml` to
push the image directly to a container registry.

This example uses `ttl.sh`, which is a free-to-use Docker registry for short-lived hosting of images. You can also change the code to use your own registry such as a local one or the Docker Hub.

Replace the previous plugin definition with this one (or add this one if you skipped step 3):

```xml

>  <plugin>

Reviewer: I liked the way the previous one was formatted with more spaces before `<plugin>` so I could just paste it into the xml file

...
```

The image name is parameterised with a timestamp, so yours will look different.
The image won't be in your local Docker instance, but you can pull it as
normal:

```shell
docker pull ttl.sh/jib-demo-20250912095951:20m
```

The `ttl.sh` registry is only for temporary testing of images and your image
will be deleted in 20 minutes. 

This time the built image is a multi-platform image -- if you pull the image
from an `amd64` host you will get the `amd64` version and if you pull from an
`arm64` host you will get the `arm64` version. You can also force the platform
when pulling:

```shell
docker pull --platform amd64 ttl.sh/jib-demo-20250912095951:20m
```

## Other Features

### Building a tar archive

If you want a local copy of the image as a file that can be later loaded by a
container runtime or saved to a file server, you can instead build the image as
a tar archive.

This doesn't work for multiplatform images unfortunately, so to test you will
need to remove one of the platforms in the from definition. (Or alternatively,
pull the architecture setting into a parameter.)

The following plugin definition will build a tarball for the `amd64` platform:

```xml

> <plugin>

Reviewer: I would add spacing here

Author: another copy/paste typo. Thanks.

            </goals>
          </execution>
        </executions>
        <configuration>
          <from>
            <image>cgr.dev/chainguard/jre:latest</image>
            <platforms>
              <platform>
                <os>linux</os>
                <architecture>amd64</architecture>
              </platform>
            </platforms>
          </from>
          <to>
            <image>linky</image>
          </to>
          <container>
            <ports>
              <port>8080</port>
            </ports>
            <creationTime>USE_CURRENT_TIMESTAMP</creationTime>
          </container>
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
```

After replacing the plugin definition, run:

```shell
mvn clean install
```
     
And the output should give you the location of the built tarball:

```
...
[INFO]
[INFO] Built image tarball at /Users/amouat/proj/jib-demo/target/jib-image.tar
...
```

You can directly load this tarball into Docker:

```shell
docker load < target/jib-image.tar
```

This should respond with the name of the built image:

```
Loaded image: linky:latest
```

If required, the image can then be retagged and pushed to a registry.

### Calling goals directly

> In these examples, you've been editing the pom.xml to configure the execution goal. You can also directly call these from Maven e.g:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these examples, you've been editing the pom.xml to configure the execution goal. You can also directly call these from Maven, for example:
```
